---
title: API Versioning
description: FastEndpoints provides a unique, yet simplified model for versioning your endpoints to ease the developer's life.
---

# {$frontmatter.title}

The versioning strategy in FastEndpoints is simplified to require way less effort by the developer.

Basically, you evolve/version each endpoint in your project independently and group them into a release number/name using Swagger.

When it's time for an endpoint contract to change, simply leave the existing endpoint alone and create (either by inheriting the old one) or creating a brand new endpoint class and call the Version(x) method in the configuration to indicate that this is the latest incarnation of the endpoint.

For example, let's assume the following:

**Initial State**

Your app has the following endpoints:

```
/admin/login
/inventory/order/{OrderID}
```

**After Evolving an Endpoint**

```
/admin/login
/admin/login/v1
/inventory/order/{OrderID}
```

At this point you can have 2 releases (Swagger documents) that look like the following:

```
 - initial release
 |- /admin/login
 |- /inventory/order/{OrderID}

 - release 1.0
 |- /admin/login/v1
 |- /inventory/order/{OrderID}
```

**After Another Change**

```
- /admin/login
- /admin/login/v1
- /admin/login/v2
- /inventory/order/{OrderID}
- /inventory/order/{OrderID}/v1
```

Your releases can now look like this:

```
 - initial release
 |- /admin/login
 |- /inventory/order/{OrderID}

 - release 1.0
 |- /admin/login/v1
 |- /inventory/order/{OrderID}

 - release 2.0
 |- /admin/login/v2
 |- /inventory/order/{OrderID}/v1
```

A release group contains only the latest iteration of each endpoint in your project.
All older/previous iterations will not show up.
How to define release groups is described below.

## Enable Versioning

Simply specify one of the **VersioningOptions** settings in startup config in order to activate versioning.

```cs
app.UseFastEndpoints(c =>
{
    c.Versioning.Prefix = "v";
});
```

## Define Swagger Release Groups

```cs |title=Program.cs
builder.Services.AddSwaggerDoc(s =>
    {
        s.DocumentName = "Initial Release";
        s.Title = "my api";
        s.Version = "v1.0";
    })
    .AddSwaggerDoc(maxEndpointVersion: 1, settings: s =>
    {
        s.DocumentName = "Release 1.0";
        s.Title = "my api";
        s.Version = "v1.0";
    })
    .AddSwaggerDoc(maxEndpointVersion: 2, settings: s =>
    {
        s.DocumentName = "Release 2.0";
        s.Title = "my api";
        s.Version = "v2.0";
    });
```

The thing to note here is the **maxEndpointVersion** parameter.
This is where you specify the **max version** of an endpoint which a release group should include.

Any endpoint versions that are greater than this number will not be included in that release group/swagger doc.

If you don't specify this, only the initial version of each endpoint will be listed in the group.

## Mark Endpoint With a Version

```cs
public class AdminLoginEndpoint_V2 : Endpoint<Request>
{
    public override void Configure()
    {
        Get("admin/login");
        Version(2);
    }
}
```

## Deprecate an Endpoint

You can specify that an endpoint should not be visible after (and including) a given version group like so:

```cs
Version(1, deprecateAt: 4);
```

An endpoint marked as above will be visible in all swagger docs up until **maxEndpointVersion : 4**. It will be excluded from docs starting from **4** and above. As an example, take the following two endpoints:

**Initial release**

```
/user/delete
/user/profile
```

**Release Group v1.0**

```
/user/delete/v1
/user/profile/v1
```

**Release Group v2.0**

```
/user/delete/v1
/user/profile/v2
```

If you mark the **/user/delete/v1 endpoint** with **Version(1, deprecateAt: 2)** then release groups **v2.0** and newer will not have any **/user/delete** endpoints listed.

And the release will look like this:

**release group v2.0**

```
/user/profile/v2
```

It is only necessary to mark the last endpoint version as deprecated.
You can leave all previous iterations alone, if there's any.

## Versioning Options

At least one of the following settings should be set in order to enable versioning support.

- **Prefix** : A string to be used in front of the version (for example 'v' produces 'v1')

- **DefaultVersion** : This value will be used for endpoints that do not specify a version in it's configuration.
  The default value is **0**.
  When the version of an endpoint is 0 it does not get added to the route making that version the initial version of that endpoint.

- **SuffixedVersion** : By default the version string is **appended** to the endpoint route. By setting this to **false**, you can have it **prepended** to the route.

## Ad Hoc Grouping Of Endpoints
It's possible to group a bunch of endpoints together into a swagger document by employing an endpoint filter. I.e. only endpoints in your application that matches a condition/predicate will be included in that particular swagger doc.
```cs
builder.Services.AddSwaggerDoc(s =>
{
    s.DocumentName = "Group A (v1)";
    s.Title = "My App";
    s.Version = "v1.0";
    s.EndpointFilter(ep => ep.EndpointTags?.Contains("GroupA") is true);
});

builder.Services.AddSwaggerDoc(s =>
{
    s.DocumentName = "Group B (v1)";
    s.Title = "My App";
    s.Version = "v1.0";
    s.EndpointFilter(ep => ep.EndpointTags?.Contains("GroupB") is true);
});
```
If the predicate returns true for a particular endpoint definition, it will be included in the swagger doc. In the above example, only endpoints that has the tag **"GroupA"** associated with it would be included in the **"Group A"** swagger doc. It can be any criteria that can be matched against the supplied [endpoint definition](https://api-ref.fast-endpoints.com/api/FastEndpoints.EndpointDefinition.html). The example uses endpoint tags which are specified like so:

```cs
public override void Configure()
{
    ...
    Tags("GroupA");
    Version(1);
}

public override void Configure()
{
    ...
    Tags("GroupB");
    Version(1);
}
```