---
title: Misc Conveniences
description: A light-weight REST Api framework for ASP.Net 6 that implements REPR (Request-Endpoint-Response) Pattern.
---

# {$frontmatter.title}

## Endpoint Options

In addition to the convenient methods you can use in the endpoint configuration to setup your endpoints (mentioned in previous pages), you can use the **Options()** method to customize aspects of endpoint registration/setup like so:

```cs
Options(b => b.RequireCors(x => x.AllowAnyOrigin())
              .RequireHost("domain.com")
              .ProducesProblem(404));
```

## Shorthand Route Configuration

Instead of the **Verbs()** and **Routes()** combo, you can use the shorthand versions that combines them with when configuring your endpoints like so:

- **Get()**
- **Post()**
- **Put()**
- **Patch()**
- **Delete()**

```cs
public override void Configure()
{
    Get("/api/customer/{CustomerID}");
}
```

The above is equivalent to using both **Verbs()** and **Routes()**. Do note that you can't configure multiple verbs with the shorthand version. You can however setup multiple route patterns with the shorthand methods.

## Endpoint Properties

The following properties are available to all endpoint classes.

- **BaseURL** (string)
The base URL of the current request in the form of **https://hostname:port/** (includes trailing slash). if your server is behind a proxy/gateway, use the [forwarded headers middleware](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/aspnet/core/host-and-deploy/proxy-load-balancer?view=aspnetcore-6.0) to get the correct address.

- **Config** (IConfiguration)
Gives access to current configuration of the web app

- **Env** (IWebHostEnvironment)
Gives access to the current web hosting environment

- **Files** (IFormFileCollection)
Exposes the uploaded file collection in case of **multipart/form-data** uploads.

- **Form** (IFormCollection)
Exposes the form data in case of **application/x-www-form-urlencoded** or **multipart/form-data** uploads.

- **HttpContext** (HttpContext)
Gives access to the current HTTP context of the request.

- **HttpMethod** (Http enum value)
The http method of the current request as an enum value.

- **Logger** (ILogger)
The default logger for the current endpoint type

- <span id="tres"/>**Response** (TResponse)
Exposes a blank response DTO for the current endpoint before the endpoint handler is executed or represents the populated response DTO after a response has been sent to the client.

- **User** (ClaimsPrincipal)
The current claims principal associated with the current request.

- **ValidationFailed** (bool)
Indicates the current validation status

- **ValidationFailures** (List&lt;ValidationFailure&gt;)
The list of validation failures for the current execution context.

## Send Methods

The following response [sending methods](https://fast-endpoints.com/api/FastEndpoints.Endpoint-2.html#FastEndpoints_Endpoint_2_SendAsync__1_System_Int32_CancellationToken_) are available for use from within endpoint handlers:

- **SendAsync()**
Sends a given response dto or any object that can be serialized as JSON down to the requesting client.

- **SendCreatedAtAsync()**
Sends a 201 created response with a **Location** header containing where the resource can be retrieved from. [See note](swagger-support#custom-endpoint-names) about using with custom endpoint names.

- **SendStringAsync()**
Sends a given string to the client in the response body.

- **SendOkAsync()**
Sends a 200 ok response without any body.

- **SendNoContentAsync()**
Sends a 204 no content response.

- **SendRedirectAsync()**
Sends a 30X moved response with a location header containing the URL to redirect to.

- **SendErrorsAsync()**
Sends a 400 error response with the current list of validation errors describing the validation failures.

- **SendNotFoundAsync()**
Sends a 404 not found response.

- **SendUnauthorizedAsync()**
Sends a 401 unauthorized response.

- **SendForbiddenAsync()**
Sends a 403 forbidden response.

- **SendBytesAsync()**
Sends a byte array to the client.

- **SendFileAsync()**
Sends a file to the client.

- **SendStreamAsync()**
Sends the contents of a stream to the client.

- **SendEventStreamAsync()**
Sends a "server-sent-events" data stream to the client.

## Hook Methods

The following 4 hook methods allow you to do something before and after DTO validation as well as handler execution.

- **OnBeforeValidate()**
override this method if you'd like to do something to the request dto before it gets validated.

- **OnAfterValidate()**
override this method if you'd like to do something to the request dto after it gets validated.

- **OnValidationFailed()**
override this method if you'd like to do something when validation fails.

- **OnBeforeHandle()**
override this method if you'd like to do something to the request dto before the handler is executed.

- **OnAfterHandle()**
override this method if you'd like to do something after the handler is executed.
