---
title: Remote Procedure Calls
description: Developing event based applications in FastEndpoints is highly performant and convenient to use.
---

# Remote Procedure Calls With gRPC

## Remote Command Bus

It's possible to have [command classes](command-bus#_1-define-a-command) live in one server and their respective [handler classes](command-bus#_2-define-a-command-handler) located in a completely different remote server. When the commands are executed, they go over the wire to the relevant remote server that hosts the handler. Once the handler execution completes, the result is brought back to the requesting server transparently, as if it was located in the same process. Difference would be the network latency and cost of DTO serialization incurred.

This feature is based on the [gRPC for .NET](https://github.com/grpc/grpc-dotnet) package. By default, the communication channel is insecure (unencrypted) for ease of development and transient network errors cause the operations to be automatically retried. See the default channel options [here](https://github.com/FastEndpoints/FastEndpoints/blob/main/Src/Messaging.Remote/Client/RemoteConnection.cs#L24-L49). Make sure to set up TLS for the server (that hosts the handlers) as described [here](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/aspnet/core/grpc/aspnetcore?view=aspnetcore-7.0&tabs=visual-studio#tls) when deploying to production if the servers are not located in the same internal network/vnet. Ideally for speedy communication, consider placing all the servers in the same local network instead of having to communicate over the internet.

### Project Setup
Instead of the traditional gRPC **.proto** files, our contracts are defined by the `ICommand` & `ICommandHandler` interfaces. Typically you'd have a multi-project solution with at least 3 projects.

1. **Contracts** - Where the command and result DTOs reside.
2. **Server** - Where the command handlers are hosted.
3. **Client** - Where the command execution is initiated.

### The Shared Contracts Project

This project will only contain the command/result DTOs such as these:
```cs
public class CreateOrderCommand : ICommand<CreateOrderResult>
{
    public int OrderId { get; set; }
    public string CustomerName { get; set; }
}

public class CreateOrderResult
{
    public string Message { get; set; }
}
```

And only needs to reference FastEndpoints core messaging library (**netstandard2.1**):
```xml
  <ItemGroup>
    <PackageReference Include="FastEndpoints.Messaging.Core" Version="5.*" />
  </ItemGroup>
```

### The Handler Server Project

This project hosts the command handlers served via Kestrel as gRPC endpoints and it needs to reference the **Contracts** project as well as the FastEndpoints remote messaging library (**net6.0+**).

```xml
  <ItemGroup>
    <ProjectReference Include="..\Contracts\Contracts.csproj" />
    <PackageReference Include="FastEndpoints.Messaging.Remote" Version="5.*" />
  </ItemGroup>
```

Implement the handler like this:

```cs
public sealed class CreateOrderHandler : ICommandHandler<CreateOrderCommand, CreateOrderResult>
{
    public Task<CreateOrderResult> ExecuteAsync(CreateOrderCommand cmd, CancellationToken _)
    {
        return Task.FromResult(new CreateOrderResult()
        {
            Message = $"Order {cmd.OrderId} created for {cmd.CustomerName}"
        });
    }
}
```

Then add the handler server middleware to the ASP.Net pipeline and map/register the individual handlers as shown below:
```cs
var bld = WebApplication.CreateBuilder();

// Accept only HTTP/2 to allow insecure connections for development.
bld.WebHost.ConfigureKestrel(o => o.ListenLocalhost(6000, o => o.Protocols = HttpProtocols.Http2));

bld.AddHandlerServer();

var app = bld.Build();

app.MapHandlers(h =>
{
    h.Register<CreateOrderCommand, CreateOrderHandler, CreateOrderResult>();
});

app.Run();
```

### Client / Command Initiator Project

This application (**net6.0+**) would also need to reference both the **Contracts** project as well as FastEndpoints remote messaging library like so:
```xml
  <ItemGroup>
    <ProjectReference Include="..\Contracts\Contracts.csproj" />
    <PackageReference Include="FastEndpoints.Messaging.Remote" Version="5.*" />
  </ItemGroup>
```

Then map the remote handler server by specifying it's address and register the commands for that remote connection as shown below:

```cs
var bld = WebApplication.CreateBuilder();
var app = bld.Build();
app.MapRemote("http://localhost:6000", c =>
{
    c.Register<CreateOrderCommand, CreateOrderResult>();
});
```

:::admonition type=info
A particular type of command can only be associated with a single remote connection (handler server). 
I.e. if you register the same command inside of multiple **MapRemote(...)** calls, only the last call will be effective.
:::


You are then able to execute the command as you typically do using the appropriately named **RemoteExecuteAsync()** extension method like so:
```cs
var result = await new CreateOrderCommand
{
    OrderId = 1001,
    CustomerName = "Holly Simms"
}
.RemoteExecuteAsync();
```

### Voila!
That's all there's to it. No need for .proto file creation, service classes or decorating properties of DTOs with attributes. This RPC functionality is mainly geared towards easily moving parts of your FastEndpoints monoliths out to remote servers as microservices without a message broker for synchronous messaging needs. 

With a bit of extra effort/configuration it would be possible to enable a handler server to accept incoming gRPC requests from many hundreds of clients (.Net only - end users who would be the initiators of the commands). You'd be configuring authentication & authorization as described [here](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/aspnet/core/grpc/authn-and-authz?view=aspnetcore-7.0) but it's recommended to just use FE REST Endpoints instead for this purpose.

To be able to make gRPC requests to the handler server's gRPC endpoints from third-party/non-dotnet clients, you can configure **gRPC Reflection** as described [here](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/aspnet/core/grpc/test-tools?view=aspnetcore-7.0).

### Client Streaming & Server Streaming

As with typical gRPC, it's possible to send a stream of items/DTOs to the handler server and get back a result once the stream ends with **Client Streaming**.

With **Server Streaming**, the client sends a single command to the handler server and gets back a continuous stream of results.

Samples of both as well as the full source code for the above example can be found on [GitHub](https://github.com/FastEndpoints/Remote-Procedure-Call-Demo).

### Setting Client / Channel Options

[GrpcChannelOptions](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/aspnet/core/grpc/configuration?view=aspnetcore-7.0#configure-client-options) can be specified at startup like so:
```cs
app.MapRemote("http://localhost:6000", c =>
{
    c.ChannelOptions.MaxRetryAttempts = 5;
    c.ChannelOptions.HttpHandler = new() { ... };
    c.ChannelOptions.ServiceConfig = new() { ... };
});
```

### Client Call Options

[CallOptions](https://github.com/grpc/grpc-dotnet/blob/ff1a07b90c498f259e6d9f4a50cdad7c89ecd3c0/src/Grpc.Core.Api/CallOptions.cs#L42-L47) can be handed to the **RemoteExecuteAsync()** method like so:
```cs
var result = await new MyCommand
{
    ...
}
.RemoteExecuteAsync(new CallOptions(...));
```

### Binary Serializer

[MessagePack](https://github.com/neuecc/MessagePack-CSharp#messagepack-for-c-net-net-core-unity-xamarin) binary serialization is used (instead of Protobuf) with it's contractless resolver (eliminates the need for annotating properties) together with Lz4BlockArray compression to (de)serialize commands/results.

---

## Remote Pub/Sub Event Queues

Please refer to the **Command Bus** section above for an introduction to the gRPC implementation in FastEndpoints. This section only describes the event queuing system that employs the same underlying gRPC machinery.

### Event Bus Vs. Event Queue

Even though the two patterns may look similar due to the use of the same interfaces (**IEvent** & **IEventHandler&lt;TEvent&gt;**), they behave quite differently.

#### Event Bus (In Process): 
When events are published, the corresponding handlers(subscribers) are executed in-line/synchronously within the same process and there are no application/network boundaries to cross. Each event that's published waits until the handler completes processing the event (unless otherwise instructed). If there are exceptions thrown by the handler, the event publisher/initiator can catch and handle them.

#### Event Queue (Remote): 
Due to the disconnected nature of the event publisher & subscribers, it is not possible to do the handler executions synchronously/in-line in a performant/scalable manner. 

Instead, both the publisher (gRPC server) and subscribers (gRPC clients) have their own internal/in-memory queues (by default). When an event gets published on the server, it gets added to the internal queue for later distribution to the subscribers. The events are seamlessly streamed to the subscribers and the handlers located on the subscribers only get executed if/when the events are finally received by them (usually in a matter of milliseconds). 

If there are transient network communication issues, the operations are automatically retried in order to deliver the events to all subscribers without losing/missing any events. 

It is not possible for the publisher to know which subscribers successfully executed the handlers or if they were even executed at all. Basically this is a **"best effort"** fire-n-forget asynchronous messaging/broadcasting system. You will have to establish out-of-band communication with the subscribers if you want to check the status/progress of the handler executions. An appropriate RPC command option described above can be used for this purpose.

:::admonition type=warning
Since both publishers & subscribers hold pending events in memory (**by default**), it is possible to lose events if the processes are killed/restarted while there are pending operations or if the internal queues get overflowed due to slow processing of handlers/subscribers.

<p class="p-4">
    <b>Bottom Line:</b> If you need a reliable event broadcasting system, either use a dedicated message broker or implement a custom storage provider for event persistence as described <a href="#reliable-event-queues-with-persistence">here</a>. If using the default in-memory storage provider, use it only as the means of transport/distribution of messages to the remote nodes and create some sort of job queue system around it so that losing messages/events is acceptable.
</p>
:::

### Setup & Usage

Similarly to the RPC Command Bus described above, you'd typically be using a multi-project solution with at least 3 projects.

#### Shared Contracts Project

Create the event DTO/model class by implementing **IEvent** interface:
```cs
public sealed class SomethingHappened : IEvent
{
    public int Id { get; set; }
    public string Description { get; set; }
}
```

#### Event Publisher Project (gRPC Server)

Setup the gRPC server and register an event hub for **SomethingHappened** event.

```cs
var bld = WebApplication.CreateBuilder();
bld.WebHost.ConfigureKestrel(o => o.ListenLocalhost(6000, o => o.Protocols = HttpProtocols.Http2));
bld.AddHandlerServer();

var app = bld.Build();
app.MapHandlers(h =>
{
    h.RegisterEventHub<SomethingHappened>();
});
app.Run()
```

#### Event Subscriber Project (gRPC Client)

Create the event handler by implementing **IEventHandler&lt;TEvent&gt;** interface.

```cs
internal class WhenSomethingHappens : IEventHandler<SomethingHappened>
{
    private readonly ILogger<WhenSomethingHappens> _logger;

    public WhenSomethingHappens(ILogger<WhenSomethingHappens> logger)
    {
        _logger = logger;
    }

    public Task HandleAsync(SomethingHappened evnt, CancellationToken ct)
    {
        _logger.LogInformation("{number} - {description}", evnt.Id, evnt.Description);
        return Task.CompletedTask;
    }
}
```

Map the remote connection to the server/publisher and subscribe to the broadcast.

```cs
var bld = WebApplication.CreateBuilder();
var app = bld.Build();

app.MapRemote("http://localhost:6000", c =>
{
    c.Subscribe<SomethingHappened, WhenSomethingHappens>();
});
app.Run()
```

#### Broadcast/Publish Events On the Server

Once everything is wired up as above, now all that's left to do is publish events like below from the server:
```cs
new SomethingHappened
{
    Id = 1,
    Description = "I am a test event!"
}
.Broadcast();
```

The full source code for the above examples are available on [this GitHub repo](https://github.com/FastEndpoints/Remote-Procedure-Call-Demo).

### Reliable Event Queues With Persistence

As explained above, the default in-memory event queue storage provider may cause some events to be lost in **exceptional** circumstances, which is a typical weakness of event queues without persistence.

At the expense of overhead incurred for disk/database access, it's quite simple to add persistence by implementing your own event storage providers for both the subscribers and publishers.

#### Publisher Persistence

First, define an event storage record entity by implementing the interface [IEventStorageRecord](https://github.com/FastEndpoints/FastEndpoints/blob/main/Src/Messaging.Remote/Common/IEventStorageRecord.cs) such as [this example](https://github.com/FastEndpoints/Event-Queues-Demo/blob/main/Server/EventRecord.cs).

Then, create an implementation of [IEventHubStorageProvider](https://github.com/FastEndpoints/FastEndpoints/blob/main/Src/Messaging.Remote/Server/Events/Storage/IEventHubStorageProvider.cs) such as [this example](https://github.com/FastEndpoints/Event-Queues-Demo/blob/main/Server/HubStorageProvider.cs) for MongoDB.

Next, specify your implementations at startup like so:
```cs
app.MapHandlers(h =>
{
    h.EventHubStorageProvider<EventRecord, HubStorageProvider>();
    h.RegisterEventHub<SomethingHappened>();
});
```

#### Subscriber Persistence

Similarly to a publisher, you'd be implementing a storage entity model by implementing [IEventStorageRecord](https://github.com/FastEndpoints/FastEndpoints/blob/main/Src/Messaging.Remote/Common/IEventStorageRecord.cs) such as [this example](https://github.com/FastEndpoints/Event-Queues-Demo/blob/main/Client/EventRecord.cs).

As well as a storage provider by implementing [IEventSubscriberStorageProvider](https://github.com/FastEndpoints/FastEndpoints/blob/main/Src/Messaging.Remote/Client/Events/Storage/IEventSubscriberStorageProvider.cs) such as [this example](https://github.com/FastEndpoints/Event-Queues-Demo/blob/main/Client/SubscriberStorageProvider.cs) for MongoDB.

Your implementations for the subscriber event storage can be specified like so at startup:

```cs
app.EventSubscriberStorageProvider<EventRecord, SubscriberStorageProvider>();

app.MapRemote("http://localhost:6000", c =>
{
    c.Subscribe<SomethingHappened, WhenSomethingHappens>();
});
```

Now, pending events will not be held in memory and in case of interruptions, things will be picked up from where they left off.

### Event Queue Error Notifications
You have the choice of taking some action when errors occur in both the publisher & subscriber event queues/ storage providers. This is totally optional and the default behavior is to simply log the issues and retry the operations in most cases. Subscribing to these error notifications may be beneficial in case you'd like to do something like the following:

- Notify a human when event handler execution fails repeatedly causing the in-memory queues to overflow.
- Move an event to a dead-letter-queue if it's failed for a given number of attempts.
- Reschedule a failed event to be retried at a future date/time.
- Discard an event that failed repeatedly for a given number of tries.

You'd be hooking in to the error notifications by implementing the abstract classes **SubscriberExceptionReceiver** and/or **PublisherExceptionReceiver** and overriding the virtual methods you're interested in.

#### Subscriber Exception Receiver Methods:

- **OnStoreEventRecordError(...)**: triggered when the storage provider has trouble persisting an event record.
- **OnGetNextEventRecordError(...)**: triggered when the storage provider has trouble retrieving the next event record.
- **OnHandlerExecutionError(...)**: triggered when the event handler has trouble executing the **HandleAsync(...)** method.
- **OnMarkEventAsCompleteError(...)**: triggered when the storage provider has trouble marking an event record as complete.

Your error receiver implementation would look something like the following. Dependency injection via constructor is also supported.
```cs
internal sealed class MySubErrorReceiver : SubscriberExceptionReceiver
{
    public override async Task OnMarkEventAsCompleteError<TEvent>(IEventStorageRecord record,
                                                                  int attemptCount,
                                                                  Exception exception,
                                                                  CancellationToken ct)
    {
        //do whatever you like here
    }
}
```

You then need to register it in DI at startup like so:
```cs
builder.Services.AddSubscriberExceptionReceiver<MySubErrorReceiver>();
```

#### Publisher Exception Receiver Methods:

- **OnGetNextEventRecordError(..)**: triggered when the storage provider has trouble retrieving the next event record.
- **OnMarkEventAsCompleteError(..)**: triggered when the storage provider has trouble marking an event record as complete.
- **OnStoreEventRecordError(..)**: triggered when the storage provider has trouble persisting an event record.
- **OnInMemoryQueueOverflow(..)**: triggered when the default in-memory storage provider's internal queue for a given event type has been stagnant and in an overflow state, causing the current event to not be accepted into the queue and discarded.

A typical publisher error receiver would look something like this:
```cs
internal sealed class MyPubErrorReceiver : PublisherExceptionReceiver
{
    public override Task OnGetNextEventRecordError<TEvent>(string subscriberID,
                                                           int attemptCount,
                                                           Exception exception,
                                                           CancellationToken ct)
    {
        //do whatever you like here
    }
}
```
Which you need to be registering in DI like so:
```cs
builder.Services.AddPublisherExceptionReceiver<MyPubErrorReceiver>();
```